user-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/sections/05_steps.adoc, before:

== Steps specifications

=== Configuring a step specification

Depending on their nature, you can define steps specifications as root of a scenario or successor of another step specification.

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----
scenario("hello-netty-udp-world") {
        minionsCount = 100
        rampUp {
            // Starts all at once.
            regular(100, minionsCount)
        }
    }
    .start()
    .netty()

    .tcp { // <1>
        name = "my-tcp"
        connect {
            address("localhost", availableTcpPort)
            noDelay = true
        }
        request { tcpRequest1 }
        metrics { connectTime = true }
        events { connection = true }
    }

    .reuseTcp("my-tcp") { // <2>
        name = "reuse-tcp"
        iterate(20, Duration.ofMillis(100))
        request { tcpRequest2 }
    }
----
<1> The `tcp` step is defined as first step of the graph, differently said as root - hence, it expects `Unit` as input
<1> The `reuseTcp` step is defined as successor of `tcp` and receives its output as input.

There are two ways of configuring a step specification.
Some receive the configuration closure as parameter like the `tcp step above`.
Generally, you can also call `configure`
after a step to configure it:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    reuseTcp("my-tcp") {
        request { tcpRequest2 }
    }.configure {
        name = "reuse-tcp" // <1>
        iterate(20, Duration.ofMillis(100)) // <2>
        retryPolicy(instanceOfRetryPolicy) // <3>
        timeout(2000) // <4>
    }
----
<1> Set a name to your step: this is convenient for analysis of events, successes, failures - the same name can be used in several scenario specifications, which helps for cross-analysis and reusability.
<2> Repeat the step 20 times with an interval of 100 ms between one execution and the next one.
<3> Step-own retry policy, see <<Retry policy>> for more details.
<4> Timeout to complete the step execution, in ms.
Note that if a retry policy is set that allows another attempt, a timeout error will lead to a new execution.

=== Fan-out

When you want to split a branch and add two concurrent steps as successors, you can use the `split`:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    execute { }
        .split { // <1>
            map { ... } // <2>
                .validate{ ... }

            flatten() // <3>
                .filterNotNull()

        }
----
<1> `split` takes a closure with the step `anyStep` as receiver.
<2> The first branch receives the output of `anyStep` as input.
<3> The second branch also receives the output of `anyStep` as input but does something different with.

Here is the graphical representation:

[[fan-out]]
.Fan-out
[plantuml,fan-out,png]
....
digraph fanout {
  node[shape=record]
  execute [label="{execute(): step providing the data}"]
  map [label="{map(): transform the output of execute}"]
  validate [label="{validate(): validate the transformed\nelements and generate an error\nwhen some constraints do not match}"]
  flatten [label="{flatten(): do another parallel\ntransformation on execute output}"]
  filterNotNull [label="{filterNotNull(): only let the not null\ntransformed elements go forward}"]

  execute -> map [label="The exact same instance of object\nis passed from execute() to both map()\nand flatten() concurrently"]
  execute -> flatten
  map -> validate [label="Only the output of map is passed here"]
  flatten -> filterNotNull [label="Only the output of flatten is passed here"]
}
....

NOTE: Both branches run concurrently, their no defined execution order.

WARNING: If the entity returned by `anyStep` is mutable, take care of not altering it in one branch, because this would have side-effects on the other.
Prefer creating deep clones.

=== Fan-in / Joins

Because you split a scenario into different branches or want to verify data from different sources, you often need to join them.
You can either do it using the name of a concurrent step:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    execute { } // <1>
        .innerJoin<EntityWithKey, EntityWithId>(
            on = { "${it.key}" }, // <2>
            with = "my-datasource-poll-step", // <3>
            having = { it.id } // <4>
        )
        .map { } // <5>
----
<1> `execute` provides an output of type `EntityWithKey`, with a field `key` being an Int.
We call this step the "left" step.
<2> We provide a calculation of the key from the left side and decide to convert it as a String.
<3> The step called `my-datasource-poll-step` is declared in a parallel branch (or earlier in the same branch) and provides an output of type `EntityWithId` with a field `id` being a String.
<4> Closure to extract the key from the right side, being already a String.
<5> The result is a `Pair<EntityWithKey, EntityWithId>` where string representation of `key` of the `EntityWithKey` equals to the field `id` of the `EntityWithId`.

Records coming from the right side are kept in a cache until one comes from the left side with the same key.
Once used, they are evicted from the cache.

When a flow comes from the left side but has no corresponding record yet coming from the right, it waits until the defined timeout on the step.
See <<Configuring a step specification>> for more details.

The step context after the join inherits from the one coming from the left.

Here is the graphical representation:

image:operators/innerJoin.svg[operators-inner-join]

You can also create a step directly in the join:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    execute { }
        .innerJoin<EntityWithKey, EntityWithId>(
            on = { "${it.key}" },
            with = { // <1>
                r2dbc().poll{
                    // ...
                }
            },
            having = { it.id }
        )
        .map {}
----
<1> Things are working exactly the same as in the first example, but the step is directly created here.
The receiver of the `with` is the scenario.

=== Error processing steps

When an error occurs when executing a step, after all the potential retries, the step context being carried from top to bottom is marked as "exhausted".

From that point of the process, only the steps relevant for error processing are executed, the others are simply bypassed.

Those steps from the core are:

* `catchError`: takes the collection of errors as parameter to process them.
* `catchExhaustedContext`: takes the full exhausted step context as parameter, where you can also set the `isExhausted` flag to `false` in order execute next steps.

=== Core operators

QALIPSIS provides default operators to tweak the execution of your scenario, that do not require the addition of plugins to your classpath.

While you already know some of them described just above, others are available to let you transform, filter, verify the data, alter the behavior...

==== Timing operators

===== delay
Adds a constant delay before executing the next step, keeping the same execution pace as previous step.

image:operators/delay.svg[operators-delay]

===== pace
Ensures that the next step is executed at an expected pace, whatever the one of the input is. The calculation applies
independently to each minion.

===== acceleratingPace
Like pace, but reducing the waiting interval at each iteration.
Too slow down the pace, you can simply use an accelerator lower than 1.

image:operators/acceleratingPace.svg[operators-acceleratingPace]

===== constantPace
Applies a constant pace to execute the step after.

image:operators/constantPace.svg[operators-constantPace]

==== Filter operators

===== filter
Removes the step contexts having an input not matching the filter specification.
It can be seen as a silent equivalent of validate, because it does neither generate any error, nor mark the step context as exhausted.

image:operators/filter.svg[operators-filter]

===== validate
Validates the input. When errors are returned, the step context is marked as exausted and can then only be processed by error processing steps.

image:operators/validate.svg[operators-validate]

===== verify
Exactly like validate, but meant to be used for assertions instead of data quality / safety.

image:operators/verify.svg[operators-verify]

==== Transformation operators

===== flatMap
Converts a collective input into single element in the output, using the user-defined strategy.

image:operators/flatMap.svg[operators-flatMap]

===== flatten
Converts a collective input into single element in the output, for a known collective type (array, iterable).

image:operators/flatten.svg[operators-flatten]

===== map
Converts each element into another in the output.

image:operators/map.svg[operators-map]

===== onEach
Executes one or several statements on each element of the input, and forwards them unchanged to the output.

image:operators/onEach.svg[operators-onEach]

==== Caching operators

===== shelve
Caches the provided values in a shared cache.When using a distributed architecture, make sure the cached value
can be serialized by the used implementation of shared state registry.The ID of the minion is automatically added to
the key to avoid collusion.

===== unshelve
Fetches one or more record from the shared state registry, previously shelved with the provided keys for the same minion.

==== Utility operators

===== tube

Simply forwards the input to the output.

image:operators/tube.svg[operators-tube]

===== blackHole

Consumes the input and provides no output.

image:operators/blackHole.svg[operators-blackHole]

===== stage

Groups a linear graph of steps.
Stages are not mandatory in a scenario, but provide a convenient way to iterate, waiting for the last step to be completed before looping back.

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    stage("my-stage") {
        map { it * 3 }.map { arrayOf(it, it + 100) }.flatten() // <1>
    }.configure { // <2>
        iterate(5)
    }
----
<1> Create a chain of steps, where no `split()` is allowed.
<2> You can configure the whole stage to repeat from its beginning only once the tail step is completed

==== Combining operators

===== collect

Collects inputs across all the minions and releases them as a list, within the latest received step context.
This operator can be seen as the opposite of the `flatten`.

image:operators/collect.svg[operators-collect]

Commit message:

QALI-104 Misc fixes
- Set a timeout when search a step from another in the scenario conversion
- Create a mapWithContext
- Create shelve(name) { valueExtractor }
- When the scenario cannot be converted or the campaign cannot start, the console report should not be SUCCESSFUL (end and duration are still "<RUNNING>")

user-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/sections/05_steps.adoc, after:

== Steps specifications

=== Configuring a step specification

Depending on their nature, you can define steps specifications as root of a scenario or successor of another step specification.

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----
scenario("hello-netty-udp-world") {
        minionsCount = 100
        rampUp {
            // Starts all at once.
            regular(100, minionsCount)
        }
    }
    .start()
    .netty()

    .tcp { // <1>
        name = "my-tcp"
        connect {
            address("localhost", availableTcpPort)
            noDelay = true
        }
        request { tcpRequest1 }
        metrics { connectTime = true }
        events { connection = true }
    }

    .reuseTcp("my-tcp") { // <2>
        name = "reuse-tcp"
        iterate(20, Duration.ofMillis(100))
        request { tcpRequest2 }
    }
----
<1> The `tcp` step is defined as first step of the graph, differently said as root - hence, it expects `Unit` as input
<1> The `reuseTcp` step is defined as successor of `tcp` and receives its output as input.

There are two ways of configuring a step specification.
Some receive the configuration closure as parameter like the `tcp step above`.
Generally, you can also call `configure`
after a step to configure it:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    reuseTcp("my-tcp") {
        request { tcpRequest2 }
    }.configure {
        name = "reuse-tcp" // <1>
        iterate(20, Duration.ofMillis(100)) // <2>
        retryPolicy(instanceOfRetryPolicy) // <3>
        timeout(2000) // <4>
    }
----
<1> Set a name to your step: this is convenient for analysis of events, successes, failures - the same name can be used in several scenario specifications, which helps for cross-analysis and reusability.
<2> Repeat the step 20 times with an interval of 100 ms between one execution and the next one.
<3> Step-own retry policy, see <<Retry policy>> for more details.
<4> Timeout to complete the step execution, in ms.
Note that if a retry policy is set that allows another attempt, a timeout error will lead to a new execution.

=== Fan-out

When you want to split a branch and add two concurrent steps as successors, you can use the `split`:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    execute { }
        .split { // <1>
            map { ... } // <2>
                .validate{ ... }

            flatten() // <3>
                .filterNotNull()

        }
----
<1> `split` takes a closure with the step `anyStep` as receiver.
<2> The first branch receives the output of `anyStep` as input.
<3> The second branch also receives the output of `anyStep` as input but does something different with.

Here is the graphical representation:

[[fan-out]]
.Fan-out
[plantuml,fan-out,png]
....
digraph fanout {
  node[shape=record]
  execute [label="{execute(): step providing the data}"]
  map [label="{map(): transform the output of execute}"]
  validate [label="{validate(): validate the transformed\nelements and generate an error\nwhen some constraints do not match}"]
  flatten [label="{flatten(): do another parallel\ntransformation on execute output}"]
  filterNotNull [label="{filterNotNull(): only let the not null\ntransformed elements go forward}"]

  execute -> map [label="The exact same instance of object\nis passed from execute() to both map()\nand flatten() concurrently"]
  execute -> flatten
  map -> validate [label="Only the output of map is passed here"]
  flatten -> filterNotNull [label="Only the output of flatten is passed here"]
}
....

NOTE: Both branches run concurrently, their no defined execution order.

WARNING: If the entity returned by `anyStep` is mutable, take care of not altering it in one branch, because this would have side-effects on the other.
Prefer creating deep clones.

=== Fan-in / Joins

Because you split a scenario into different branches or want to verify data from different sources, you often need to join them.
You can either do it using the name of a concurrent step:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    execute { } // <1>
        .innerJoin<EntityWithKey, EntityWithId>(
            on = { "${it.key}" }, // <2>
            with = "my-datasource-poll-step", // <3>
            having = { it.id } // <4>
        )
        .map { } // <5>
----
<1> `execute` provides an output of type `EntityWithKey`, with a field `key` being an Int.
We call this step the "left" step.
<2> We provide a calculation of the key from the left side and decide to convert it as a String.
<3> The step called `my-datasource-poll-step` is declared in a parallel branch (or earlier in the same branch) and provides an output of type `EntityWithId` with a field `id` being a String.
<4> Closure to extract the key from the right side, being already a String.
<5> The result is a `Pair<EntityWithKey, EntityWithId>` where string representation of `key` of the `EntityWithKey` equals to the field `id` of the `EntityWithId`.

Records coming from the right side are kept in a cache until one comes from the left side with the same key.
Once used, they are evicted from the cache.

When a flow comes from the left side but has no corresponding record yet coming from the right, it waits until the defined timeout on the step.
See <<Configuring a step specification>> for more details.

The step context after the join inherits from the one coming from the left.

Here is the graphical representation:

image:operators/innerJoin.svg[operators-inner-join]

You can also create a step directly in the join:

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    execute { }
        .innerJoin<EntityWithKey, EntityWithId>(
            on = { "${it.key}" },
            with = { // <1>
                r2dbc().poll{
                    // ...
                }
            },
            having = { it.id }
        )
        .map {}
----
<1> Things are working exactly the same as in the first example, but the step is directly created here.
The receiver of the `with` is the scenario.

=== Error processing steps

When an error occurs when executing a step, after all the potential retries, the step context being carried from top to bottom is marked as "exhausted".

From that point of the process, only the steps relevant for error processing are executed, the others are simply bypassed.

Those steps from the core are:

* `catchError`: takes the collection of errors as parameter to process them.
* `catchExhaustedContext`: takes the full exhausted step context as parameter, where you can also set the `isExhausted` flag to `false` in order execute next steps.

=== Core operators

QALIPSIS provides default operators to tweak the execution of your scenario, that do not require the addition of plugins to your classpath.

While you already know some of them described just above, others are available to let you transform, filter, verify the data, alter the behavior...

==== Timing operators

===== delay
Adds a constant delay before executing the next step, keeping the same execution pace as previous step.

image:operators/delay.svg[operators-delay]

===== pace
Ensures that the next step is executed at an expected pace, whatever the one of the input is. The calculation applies
independently to each minion.

===== acceleratingPace
Like pace, but reducing the waiting interval at each iteration.
Too slow down the pace, you can simply use an accelerator lower than 1.

image:operators/acceleratingPace.svg[operators-acceleratingPace]

===== constantPace
Applies a constant pace to execute the step after.

image:operators/constantPace.svg[operators-constantPace]

==== Filter operators

===== filter
Removes the step contexts having an input not matching the filter specification.
It can be seen as a silent equivalent of validate, because it does neither generate any error, nor mark the step context as exhausted.

image:operators/filter.svg[operators-filter]

===== validate
Validates the input. When errors are returned, the step context is marked as exausted and can then only be processed by error processing steps.

image:operators/validate.svg[operators-validate]

===== verify
Exactly like validate, but meant to be used for assertions instead of data quality / safety.

image:operators/verify.svg[operators-verify]

==== Transformation operators

===== flatMap
Converts a collective input into single element in the output, using the user-defined strategy.

image:operators/flatMap.svg[operators-flatMap]

===== flatten

Converts a collective input into single element in the output, for a known collective type (array, iterable).

image:operators/flatten.svg[operators-flatten]

===== map

Converts each element into another in the output.
`mapWithContext` provides the same capability with the step context as additional argument.

image:operators/map.svg[operators-map]

===== onEach

Executes one or several statements on each element of the input, and forwards them unchanged to the output.

image:operators/onEach.svg[operators-onEach]

==== Caching operators

===== shelve
Caches the provided values in a shared cache.When using a distributed architecture, make sure the cached value
can be serialized by the used implementation of shared state registry.The ID of the minion is automatically added to
the key to avoid collusion.

===== unshelve
Fetches one or more record from the shared state registry, previously shelved with the provided keys for the same minion.

==== Utility operators

===== tube

Simply forwards the input to the output.

image:operators/tube.svg[operators-tube]

===== blackHole

Consumes the input and provides no output.

image:operators/blackHole.svg[operators-blackHole]

===== stage

Groups a linear graph of steps.
Stages are not mandatory in a scenario, but provide a convenient way to iterate, waiting for the last step to be completed before looping back.

[source,kotlin,linenumbers]
----

    stage("my-stage") {
        map { it * 3 }.map { arrayOf(it, it + 100) }.flatten() // <1>
    }.configure { // <2>
        iterate(5)
    }
----
<1> Create a chain of steps, where no `split()` is allowed.
<2> You can configure the whole stage to repeat from its beginning only once the tail step is completed

==== Combining operators

===== collect

Collects inputs across all the minions and releases them as a list, within the latest received step context.
This operator can be seen as the opposite of the `flatten`.

image:operators/collect.svg[operators-collect]
